.\"TOPICS "Topics:"
.TH filterconf 5 "December 2008" "Qsmtp Version @QSMTP_VERSION_MAJOR@.@QSMTP_VERSION_MINOR@@QSMTP_VERSION_EXTRAVERSION@" "Qsmtp"
.SH NAME
filterconf \- user configuration of SMTP level filtering
.SH DESCRIPTION
The users may configure a bunch of filter rules. There are two kinds of settings: settings configured by a 
config directive in the file "filterconf" or settings configured by it's own file. The first are descriped in 
this man page, the latter are documented in 
.BR Qsmtp(8) .
If the setting is not configured in the user directrory Qsmtpd will take the value from the domain directory. 
If there is no domain setting also the global one is taken if the setting is marked "global".

.SH SYNTAX

These settings can occur in the file 
.I filterconf 
in the user or domain directory. Settings marked global can also occur in the global file
.IR /var/qmail/control/filterconf . 
There may be comments or empty lines in the 
.I filterconf 
file, both will be ignored. There are two kinds of settings, boolean and integer. If there is a
boolean setting "foo" and there is a line containing just "foo" foo will be enabled. If there is no foo it will 
be disabled. Integer settings are "key=value", e.g. "foo=2" will set foo to 2. Neither characters between the 
key, the '=' and the value nor characters behind the value are permitted. Boolean expressions may be written as 
integers, "foo" as a boolean is the same as "foo=1" and "foo=123877", no "foo" line in the file is the same 
like "foo=0".

There is a special value "-1" which means that if the user sets "foo=-1" foo will be disabled and the domain 
config will 
.I not
be used.

.SH KEYS

.IP "\fIforcestarttls\fR" 4
Recipient only accepts mail if the transmission is SSL-encrypted. Use this with care, this
violates RfC 3207 and is only for the really paranoid users.

.IP "\fIwhitelistauth\fR" 4
.BR (global)
If the user is authenticated by SMTP AUTH or by TLS client certificate the mail
is accepted and no other filters will be checked.

.IP "\fIcheck_strict_rfc2822\fR" 4
The mail body is checked for compliance to RfC 2822. The mail is rejected if the mail is invalid. 
If only one of the recipients does not enable this check the mail will not be rejected. This is due 
to the fact that the mail must be completely transferred before it can be rejected but then only one 
reply code for all recipients can be returned.

The checks performed on the header of the mail are:
.RS 4
.IP \[bu] 2
there must be exaclty one From: line
.IP \[bu]
there must be exaclty one Date: line
.IP \[bu]
there must be exaclty one Message-Id: line
.IP \[bu]
there must be no 8 bit characters in the header
.RE

.IP "\fIfromdomain\fR" 4
.BR (global)
Do some checks to the domain of the "MAIL FROM:" address. The value is a bitwise
.I OR
of these bits and stored as one integer number.
.RS 4
.ie n .IP "bit 1" 4
reject mail if from domain does not exist (dns query returns NXDOMAIN)
.ie n .IP "bit 2" 4
reject mail if from domain resolves only to localhost addresses (i.e. something in 127.0.0.0/8 
or 0.0.0.0/8 for IPv4 or ::1 for IPv6)
.ie n .IP "bit 3" 4
reject mail if from domain resolves only to private nets (RfC 1918)
.RE

.IP "\fIreject_ipv6only\fR" 4
.BR (global)
Reject if all MX records of the "MAIL FROM:" domain point to real IPv6 addresses.
This is useful only on an IPv4 only node where this addresses can't be routed.

.IP "\fIspfpolicy\fR" 4
.BR (global)
Filter mail by the policy given by a DNS TXT record of the sender domain. The value
has this meanings:
.RS 4
.ie n .IP "1:" 4
temporary DNS errors will block mail temporary
.ie n .IP "2:" 4
reject mail if the SPF record says 'fail'
.ie n .IP "3:" 4
reject mail if the SPF record is syntactically invalid
.ie n .IP "4:" 4
reject mail when the SPF record says 'softfail'
.ie n .IP "5:" 4
reject mail when the SPF record says 'neutral'
.ie n .IP "6:" 4
rejects mail when no SPF records are found

see also: 
.I rspf 
(file), 
.I spfstrict 
(file), 
.I spfignore 
(file) in
.B Qsmtpd(8)
.RE

.IP "\fInobounce\fR" 4
Don't accept bounce messages to this recipients. This is useful if this address is never
used to send mail (e.g. contact addresses on websites) to avoid backscatter of worms and 
viruses. Never use this if the mail is used for sending mail.

.IP "\fIusersize\fR" 4
The maximum size of a message the user wants to accept. This only works if the client uses
ESMTP SIZE (which most real mailservers do). The wide spread worms with own SMTP engines don't
use this so this will not block them.

.IP "\fIblock_SoberG\fR" 4
.BR (global)
Block a mail where the combination of 
.I HELO 
and 
.I MAIL FROM 
looks like SoberG:
.I MAIL FROM:<foo@example.com>
would lead to 
.I HELO foo.com

.IP "\fIhelovalid\fR" 4
.BR (global)
Mails with invalid helo are rejected. The value is a bitwise 
.I OR
of these bits and stored as one integer number:
.RS 4
.ie n .IP "bit 1" 4
helo is "my name"
.ie n .IP "bit 2" 4
helo is "[
.I my IP address
]"
.ie n .IP "bit 3" 4
helo is syntactically invalid (e.g. contains invalid characters, is neither a full
qualified domain name nor an address literal)
.ie n .IP "bit 4" 4
currently unused
.ie n .IP "bit 5" 4
helo is my IP address, but not enclosed in '[]'. This is invalid and more or less a
combination of
.I 2
and
.I 3
.ie n .IP "all other bits:" 4
currently unused
.RE

.IP "\fIblock_wildcardns\fR" 4
If the top level domain uses wildcard entries in their nameserver for nonexisting domains
(e.g. museum does this) then this will deny such mails if the top level domain of the
sender address and the MX (typically implicit A) match one entry in control/wildcardns.

.IP "\fIsmtp_space_bug\fR" 4
.BR (global)
If the mail sender has a broken SMTP engine that inserts spaces at places not permitted by
RfC 2822 the mail will get rejected. The following values are supported:
.RS 4
.ie n .IP "0:" 4
permit these SMTP engines
.ie n .IP "1:" 4
permit if the sender uses ESMTP
.ie n .IP "2:" 4
permit if the sender uses STARTTLS or is authenticated
.ie n .IP "3:" 4
permit if the sender is authenticated
.ie n .IP "255:" 4
rejects all mails from those senders
.RE

.IP "\fIfail_hard_on_temp\fR" 4
If any filter returns with a temporary reject (e.g. sending IP is listed in a IP blacklist)
a permanent failure is announced instead of the temporary one.

.IP "\fInonexist_on_block\fR" 4
If any filter returns with a reject code the mail server will lie and tell the client the
user does not exist instead of returning a policy error.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Qsmtpd(8)
.SH AUTHOR
Rolf Eike Beer
.SH WEBSITE
http://opensource.sf-tec.de/Qsmtp/
